the worst drug disaster in history would
spread through more than 46 countries
and produce up to 20,000 badly deformed
babies worldwide
but historians today single out one
birth in 1961 that changed the course of
history in Hamburg Germany
Linda Schulte Hillen age 23 gave birth
to her first child her husband wasn't
with her at the time and it was quiet
there but then I lay back and was
relaxed and some and somebody whispered
into my ear is your husband not all
right
when I was here wide awake and I said
what
what's God what has happened to my baby
is anything wrong
yeah she said just mmm let's say without
any emotion yeah he's just got short
arms and I like a child would have asked
possibly I said and aren't they growing
any more and she said this can't grow
this will be like it is now and then I
felt like I was beaten to death a doctor
gave the first-time mothers some
friendly advice just get another child
like forget about him you know throw him
away forget about him
shortly afterwards Linda's husband
arrived and gave her some bad news he'd
been keeping from her six weeks earlier
his sister had given birth to a baby
with similar deformities it looks alike
like our child there must be something
that is the same origin the same
difficulty the same problem in the
background and we'll find it and we'll
search and we won't stop until we've
found
[Music]
the epidemic of deformed babies began
five and a half years earlier on
Christmas Day 1956 with the birth of the
first victim in a small town of Aachen
Germany a mother had taken a new drug
called thalidomide being developed by a
local drug company cami grünen thought
her husband like other green and Thal
employees had taken home a sample which
he gave to his pregnant wife the baby
would be the first of six father to my
babies possibly more born to grin and
Thal workers in the years ahead but the
company ignored the early warning
signals in their midst
none of that spewed green until 20
action grant L didn't investigate didn't
talk to the mom didn't go to the
hospital didn't look at the medical
records didn't contact experts there
were multiple opportunities for grand
tale to cut the whole disaster short
none of them were taken nine months
after the first deformed baby was born
grinning Thal launched the line' abide
on to the german market under the brand
name contig on grinning thousand
ggressive salesforce whose motto was
succeed at any cost
continue to promote the drug contig on
they claimed was a safe sedative
especially for pregnant women suffering
from morning sickness sails zoomed and
thalidomide became the second
best-selling drug next to aspirin
but Linda Schulte Hillen and her husband
Karl Hammond were determined to find out
what caused their sons short arms months
later they were no closer to finding an
answer I know my husband had times when
he said we won't make it
I think we've to give up and I said I'm
not giving up
her husband soon contacted a professor
of obstetrics dr. V Duke in Linz who had
received a few reports of deformed
babies my father and professor lens they
traveled Germany in their Road
Volkswagen and they went from one small
village to another and asked are there
any children with short legs or short
arms born and those kids were hidden
away at that time in the small villages
and he he asked in restaurants and bars
and the local police office and
everybody said no not in our town and
then he showed a picture of me and said
this is my boy and can I please repeat
my question and then they said well at
the end of the road there has been a
very sad incident and then he went there
and brings it on showed the first thing
he did was showing the picture of means
that this is my son do you also have
ever kid like this the people burst in
tears and and children and into my
children's were well pulled to the day
of flight literally
[Music]
in England fill-in imide was being sold
under the brand name disavowed by the
country's largest liquor manufacturer
the distillers company as in Germany
distillers had received reports of
deformed babies but had been assured by
grin and thought that the drug was
completely safe Louise Mason was one of
530 the lid amide babies born in England
over a six and a half year period Louise
only learned about the circumstances of
her birth by reading her father's
best-selling autobiography I hadn't got
any arms and I hadn't got any legs and
my dad said it was like little flower
bugs and you know from my arms and from
my legs my dad had to look at me and he
said my god you're not going to let this
baby live and they said yes
my mum was only 21 and she was advised
by doctors to put me away and
concentrate on having it another family
after 11 days in hospital her parents
took Louise to an institution for
handicapped children where she would
spend the next 18 years of her life but
Louise was fortunate her father had not
asked another doctor to end her life it
is unquestionable that midwives and
doctors were killing disabled children
in the hospitals in the delivery rooms
on a large scale in Britain in Germany
and if they're probably everywhere else
in Liege Belgium the mother of an
armless baby decided her daughter's
future was hopeless this was the final
day of the thalidomide trial the baby's
mother and four accomplices were charged
with the murder of the child born
without arms at last the jury retired to
consider the effort
not guilty all five acquitted what
relief and what a reception they got
in Canada another armless baby was
spared by a poor Ukrainian family in
rural Saskatchewan years later
Alvin law learned how horrified his
natural parents were when he was born
ultimately it was the paternal
grandmother who didn't want to have
anything to do with this she said you're
not gonna bring that devil baby home
with you he's he's deformed because of a
curse the armless baby wasn't taken home
after doctors warned he would never lead
a normal life but after six weeks an
elderly couple Jack and Hilda law who
had already raised their own children
volunteered as foster parents and got
their first look at Alvin I took one
look and I thought no wonder nobody
wanted her and the next time I went to
see of course they had a bath and
dressed and he didn't look too bad at
all
well I wasn't in favor of taking him
talk no wait we'd raised our family and
that was it but
it was a baby with nobody wanted him so
what he can do
turned out okay my life story shifted
the moment that Sophie and Peter my
birth father gave me up that that that
is a profound chapter shift in my life
because I went to live with the laws my
life became this life
[Music]
[Applause]
in Cincinnati Ohio a deeply religious
Roman Catholic couple with six children
were expecting another normal birth my
mother's story is that when I was born
they were not at all prepared
the doctor said joy your baby doesn't
have any legs so she says that she took
the baby me and she said well Ilene is
my four-leaf clover I have a sibling who
told me that my father cried and that
when he came home he handed me to my
siblings and everyone got very upset and
they said take it away someone ripped
off the blankets and said that's not a
baby or something to that effect that's
not our sister that was what I was told
as a young child
painful Eileen Cronin was one of several
thalidomide babies born in Cincinnati
where an American drug company
Richardson Merrill had their
headquarters like the German drug
company Merrill promoted the drug as
completely safe even during pregnancy
like grinning Thal Merrill had no
evidence to back this up
Merrill applied to the Federal Drug
Administration in 1960 for approval to
bring thalidomide onto the American
market and was allowed to conduct
clinical trials on patients across the
country now it wasn't a credit clinical
trial at all what it was was a marketing
campaign trumped up to look like a
clinical trial Michael magaz Anik is an
Australian lawyer and former
investigative reporter who spent years
researching the thalidomide disaster
what Meryl wanted to do was to
familiarize doctors with their drug so
that once they got approval they would
have doctors all ready to go
thrilled with the drug ready to
prescribe it like crazy during this time
Richardson Merrill handed out two and a
half million solidified pills to
thousands of doctors in the United
States and Canada in Winnipeg dr. Claude
Murphy was one of those doctors we
received it in quantities like a
thousand pills a doctor was given free
to pass out to his patients there was
tremendous pressure on all over the
world to get this wonderful new drug on
the market and the companies that were
producing it even after the recant came
questions about its safety kept right on
pushing it
dr. Murphy had good reason to be
concerned about the emerging thalidomide
disaster as he awaited the birth of his
fourth child his wife Peggy had been
prescribed too little mite by another
doctor I'd warned the nurses at the
hospital we could be in for trouble and
we will dren to the delivery room then
went into the doctors dressing room I
turned looked through the window and I
saw the nurse looking with horror at the
at the stretcher you know and realized
there was something wrong
so I burst into the room and he he'd
kill him a breech you see because of
this lack of legs of a small bump and
his large head there he was stuck with
her on the stretcher with their just his
bottom so the nurse got me a pair of
forceps and I slipped the forceps over
his after coming ahead and delivered him
and if I hadn't been there he never
would have made it so as soon as he was
born he started screaming
no hesitation at all you dare never stop
screaming since
I'd have to say I was British devastated
by the whole thing
I never dealt with anybody who had done
like physical deficiencies before and
then I had to to break the news to the
other kids and did that the next day or
so it was surprising
well they said dad you got to bring that
baby home
[Music]
the lid amide was now being sold in
close to 50 countries worldwide in 1961
in Australia dr. William McBride
delivered three thalidomide babies in a
few months he alerted distillers the
British distributor thalidomide but they
claimed they never received his warnings
and pregnant mothers like Wendy Rowe
continued to take the lid amide for
morning sickness but when her daughter
Lynette was born when they immediately
knew something was wrong when she was
born it was just deadly silence in the
in the room and I just knew that
something must be wrong
and nobody said a word it was just loud
silence and anyway finally they said to
me that there was a problem and that
Lynne had no arms or legs and you know
and they gave it to me and she went she
doesn't look very different to what she
does now she had sticking up here and
the cutest little face and but I yeah
it's just like it was like a nightmare I
suppose you know but then I you know
when you looked at her and thought with
you you've got to love it you can't you
know you can't do anything about it but
if they said we think she's got some
brain damage but we don't know what
extent and I just looked at it and I
thought there's this little thing now I
was amazed and it's just got brain
damage as well what I forgot
they told me that I should put her in a
home that she would be dead in six
months we left her there for a week
while we went away just to get our head
around it all and didn't came back to
figure out and that was really hard
going back to the hospital to pick her
up in Germany grinning Thals a Burt
izing campaign was paying huge dividends
the company's owner and executives were
making fortunes overnight especially
Heinrich Mukta grinning thous
during the war
Mukhtar served as a Nazi doctor
developing vaccines which were tested on
Jewish prisoners in the book and vile
concentration camp many of whom died
after the war doctor joined grinning
Thal nine years later he invented solid
amide and received a bonus for every
third amide pills sold worldwide the
drug was such a success for grinning pal
that they started making money hand over
fist and Heinrich Muktar who was on a
percentage of profits moved from being
modestly affluent to having so much
money pouring in he could have bought
himself a new Mercedes every month by
1961 really he's making twenty times his
salary in turnover percentage so he's
getting this massive massive bonus he's
become a ludicrously rich man on the
back of thalidomide what would a man
like that with a history of wartime
experimentation strong personality a
massive income riding on the sales of
fluid Ahmad what would one expect that
he would do when confronted with reports
of nerve damage and other side effects
and it is not surprising to me that
there was not a rush at Grand Isle to
investigate to get to the bottom of it
to put warnings on the drug to withdraw
to take all sorts of precautions they
didn't know then they just focused on
selling more the drug in Germany where
the pills sold at a rate of 15 million a
month 5,000 children a mid born deformed
from Stolberg Germany Morley Safer
reports in November of 1961 just 300
miles from here in Hamburg dr. Varick
invents the director of human
genetics at the University of Hamburg
found an astounding increase in the
number of deformed babies he did used
that contig and/or polygamy was the
cause it was clearly going to take
something or someone extraordinary to
force green and health withdraw the drug
and that didn't happen until lens
contacted them he spoke to Heinrich
Muktar and said I have these very strong
suspicions I have 14 cases of birth
malformations where I think it could
only be thalidomide I think you oughta
withdraw the drug looked a wouldn't
withdraw it instead
Grune and thous response to lens was to
send out reassuring letters to German
doctors Greenland town sent out 66,000
letters to German doctors declaring
their drug was safe sixty-six thousand
letters to German doctors I mean you
know it's that was a period where
they've been told that their drug was
likely responsible for an epidemic of
malformations and deaths and they're
telling doctors their drug is safe and
it really wasn't until the press got
hold of it and they knew it was gonna go
public that they finally backed off and
agreed on November 28 1961 a day after
the thalidomide scandal made headlines
in West Germany grinning Thal announced
it was withdrawing the drug from the
market even if its latest the spring of
1961 they had taken the drug off the
market then they would have spared half
the babies
Michael Vaughn glezos disabilities
weren't so severe but as a young child
Nico had trouble adjusting to his short
arms he finding the Ainslie his keen to
figure vine don't as it is competent to
also be Cinderella the feeling of
Ironmen on Venice from veganism in our
mouth that's him whenever boring men
hope soil food of technology when tis
five of America fear decides to handle a
killer of bounds of yet another heart
formula
and yet our famiiy angst about far in
early globish finally flourished
[Music]
in England Louise Mason didn't see her
parents and three siblings for months at
a time I was left alone most the time my
parents had other children there's no
way that they could leave them with my
nan because my grandpa was ill so they
just stopped coming
I went home three weeks a year for a
week by week in the summer or making a
Christmas or Easter every holiday was
like getting to know your brothers and
sisters again we had a lot of fun when I
was a kid we had a lot of fun I had a
very good childhood
I mean clearly when God made me he
didn't have somebody making handstands
on his mind
so the handicap came annoying from time
to turn even as a child he was
completely free he was completely
fearless for him it was natural I don't
see myself as as disabled let's put it
this way I have short arms and this can
come very annoying from time to time but
I'm not disabled to that I feel inferior
or that I think I cannot do certain
things
in Yorkton Saskatchewan Alvin laws
parents decided the best way to get
there armless son to cope with life was
to turn his toes into fingers for hours
Alvin was given manual tasks to perform
with his feet now granted having no arms
isn't exactly a a rather simple
disability it's a very complicated
disability and I'd be lying if I didn't
say it was a lot of work a lot of work a
lot of time spent by myself and very
lonely and very afraid and very
frustrated but I think it was the
character that was built by my parents
especially by my parents that allowed me
to not really think that I was all that
different it's not an easy thing to get
dressed but again it goes back to the
basic theory of my life and that is do I
have someone look after me or do I look
after myself
but more than anything I think it's a
mindset you know that okay there's a lot
of people in our world that have way
bigger problems than I have so that I
have to spend a little extra effort
putting my clothes on so what
the moment I started using my toes
and my feet and my legs was the same
moment I ceased to have a disability in
the United States there would have been
thousands of thalidomide babies like
Alvin law except for the actions of one
woman dr. Frances Kelsey a Canadian born
doctor and pharmacologist had just
joined the Federal Drug Administration
when she received an application to
bring thalidomide onto the american
market here was a drug that looked like
it should be no problem but at the same
time there was just a feeling that there
was something in the data or the absence
of data that was a cause of concern the
application came from Richardson Meryl
one of America's oldest drug companies
known years ago for its best-selling
product Vicks cough drops make Elsie was
extraordinarily determined brave tough
resilient and she kept knocking back
Merrill's application she kept telling
them that there was not the testing to
back their application that it was
substandard they never managed to
persuade her their drug was safe and fit
for sale Meryl poured on the pressure
they contacted the FDA 50 times they
went behind her back to her superiors
they complained about her and writing
they threatened libel proceedings they
pushed and pushed and pushed and she was
resolute she was unbelievably tough
I know that we're all s most indebted to
dr. Kelsey the relationship beat the
hopes that all of us have for our
children that in August 1962 President
John F Kennedy awarded the highest
civilian honor an American can receive
to dr. Frances Kelsey so Kelsey really
saved the United States from a
german-style for tomato epidemic and
Meryl was ready to go
Meryl had tons of the drug in the United
States it had already spread two and a
half million pills around around the
country to doctors it had a sales force
called in the multiple wonders of food
imagine all the fake inflated claims for
its usefulness and its safety and if
Kelsey had given them the green light
the United States would have been
flooded with the drug and they would
have been a birth malformation epidemic
in that country it's a rival that in
Germany while dr. Kelsey said I need to
know more I want to have more I demand
to have more the Canadian government
simply approved it and I believe that
was below the standard of what should
have been expected from an
industrialized first world country like
very civilized Canada thalidomide
continued to be sold in Canada for four
months after it was withdrawn from the
German market the Food and Drug
Directorate in Ottawa issued no warnings
to the public while the drug remained on
pharmacy shelves the Canadian government
and its Food and Drug Directorate could
have done something four months earlier
and there about 30 Canadians whose
mothers took the drug after the whistle
had been blown in Germany and after the
Canadian drug companies knew that the
drug was dangerous but kept selling it
I come home from the playground one day
my mom says honey good news you're going
to get arms dear I mean you just
remember a day like that
right I thought we were going shopping
you know arms are us I don't know I was
very confused they they had hooks and
they were made of metal and plastic and
wood I mean I couldn't take off my shoes
I wasn't allowed to use my feet can you
imagine how weird that was so this
became an interesting life
half of my life was being Alvin Law the
kid with no arms the other half of my
life was this terrible victim of
thalidomide I lost my sense of who I was
right stick these arms on me I'm not
Alvin law anymore no no the law doesn't
have any arms artificial or not and why
why would I need them I mean there was
no good reason not one good reason to
use them for years I told them a these
aren't doing me any good and it was like
shut up I was how blunt it was you know
we know what we're doing you don't
[Music]
most little dividers don't use
artificial limbs today but Eileen Cronin
is an exception
she wears artificial legs every day to
get around I was born with both legs
missing from the knees down according to
my mother I did adapt to the legs pretty
quickly if you have you know artificial
legs a lot of things go wrong you've got
to go around conducting your life and
yet you know you've got a skin infection
and you've got to put your leg on what
are you gonna do me I put the leg on I
go that's not always the best thing to
do but that's what I do in Australia
artificial limbs proved to be useless
and even dangerous for Lynette Rowe
these legs would design for lint walking
but they're terribly dangerous because
every step she took she had to rock from
side to side the least little thing on
the path she would just fall over
straight down Lynette required the
full-time care of her devoted parents
for years her mother's nightly routine
was always the same and you know getting
up in the night and turning her and
giving her pain and it's just sort of
it's a constant thing that I had talked
to some young mothers sometimes and they
say oh I can't pick it up tonight I said
I've been doing that for 52 years the
rows are an extraordinary family and
when I went out there for the first time
to meet to meet the family
I found it profoundly moving I mean they
were you know Lynne was 47 or 48 years
old by that time her parents had cared
for her as her primary carers for that
entire period when is catastrophic Lee
injured she has a remarkable spirit but
she's catastrophically physically
injured and their parents it's defined
her parents lives have you had enough
sure okay
in March 1967 the owner and eight
executives of grunen Thal the German
drug company were charged with criminal
negligence
premeditated bodily harm and
manslaughter among the defendants was
Heinrich Motor the Nazi doctor who made
a fortune inventing thalidomide one
german historian has looked at a short
list of grinning pal staff from the
early sixties and he said it's
absolutely astonishing that a small
company should have such a concentration
of convicted war criminals on its staff
unusual even by the standards of
post-war Germany another chopped
grinning Thal executive was Otto Ambrose
a Nazi war criminal known as the devil's
chemist Ambrose was convicted of war
crimes he committed at Auschwitz for
which he served four years in prison but
after the war the chemist found no
shortage of employers including Dow
Chemical J Peter grace and the US Army's
chemical Corps before he became chairman
of grinning thyroid of Directors in 1971
so in the 1970s Granatell had as the
chair of its board a man convicted of
mass murder and slavery at Auschwitz it
sounds crazy when you say it out loud I
mean a mass murderer as the chair of
their board
the man who hired Nazi war criminals
like Ambrose and Mook tear was grinning
Thal owner Haman verse Virts was a
member of the local Nazi Party in his
hometown before the Second World War a
service for which he was handsomely
rewarded by adolphe Hitler the vietze
family companies had actually thrived
during the war years because they'd had
a contract from the German army to
supply soap and detergents they had been
supplied with slave workers they had
been basically handed to companies on a
plate that were both either Jewish owned
or Jewish controlled use of no Burger
was the personal lawyer for Agron and
house owner Haman Virts but in December
1966 no Berger resigned suddenly and
became justice minister in the province
where the trial was being held
granite house chief defense lawyer ended
up with a government responsibility for
overseeing the conduct at the trial that
kind of stinks and one German observer
of the day said this makes us look worse
than a banana republic away from the
trial a secret deal was worked out
between grinning thousand or Hermann
verts and the provincial government the
secret deal was only revealed when the
trial was dramatically stopped after two
and a half years under the deal volumes
of the prosecution's evidence would be
sealed from public view in return for
having all the serious criminal charges
against its owner and executives dropped
the company agreed to pay the victims
lifetime pensions ranging from thirty to
a hundred and forty dollars a month as
well as small one-time payments but in
order to collect the money the lid
immitis had to agree not to launch any
further suits against grinning felt so
taken as a whole the trial was a
glorious if unlikely triumph or grand
tale grim tale really escaped from the
disaster relatively lightly given the
scale and the
scope of the tragedy
[Music]
while Canada loudly celebrated its 100th
birthday in 1967 the thalidomide
families suffered in silence a few
parents had committed suicide others
became alcoholics and some were having
severe psychiatric problems that falooda
my children were now school-aged but the
question that plagued medical and
educational authorities was what type of
school should they enter some experts
recommended schools for the handicapped
while others advised the regular
education system in Yorkton Saskatchewan
alvin laws parents had run into
opposition from the local grade school
when they tried to enroll him school
says wait he's got no arms he can't go
to this school no no such a thing as
integration mom and dad are going what's
integration he's a kid he needs to go to
go to school he needs to learn he needs
to be educated he can write he can read
what else do you need the school finally
agreed to take Alvin but soon afterwards
he ran into a reaction his teachers
expected and feared I came home and I
was very upset because somebody had
called me crippled I'd never heard that
word before it was never used in this
house and it was never used in this
neighborhood but I go to school and
there was new kids and someone called me
crippled so I had to run home and I was
a little freaked out you know mom calmed
me down and that's when I first remember
hearing those words that some people are
born with black hair and some people are
born with blond hair and you were born
without arms
compared to Alvin monie Eisenberg's
disabilities were relatively small she
was born with a short arm but
nevertheless her mother was determined
to hide it from public view when she was
a child only years later did Moni
understand why when hot mutant Amazo
conscious on mental energy for
Schneiderlin
woman mana be Hindu only sir the sad see
go back to Mr Hudson Valley hot iron
sculpt does mention of mission sue gain
on slash this as a meeting was untoned
ordinal Moniz mother couldn't forget
that the first victims
Adolphe Hitler and the Nazis rounded up
for extermination were disabled children
she
he lived near head of our Hospital one
of the extermination sites Hama English
hospital feel lighter with the elation
can corn on her Dharma is about warrants
or becoming a gas comma and this wooden
Ito and others Ahmad and thousand and
and we not mentioned a plant on doors
curfew in Georgian Irish don't want and
is a fire Lincoln now warden mid cacao
on Busan up a world Manhattan Alton for
America tired
the Kindle common in Auschwitz Alyce
Caron hostile of this even would gain
but as near ask accomplished for the
Aten vast nikla I was pesetas medicine
Kingdom there was the hospitals where
they were taking these disabled people
to to be murdered that were really the
test beds for the Holocaust it was it
was in a hospital that the first gas
chambers were being used for both
killing of people as a violation little
eyes were born warden the other Schmidt
C Shahi tons often good gonna be no hard
mr.amer a dongle at warden the medical
staff of these places were very
enthusiastic supporters and I seen a
report from haddem our hospital where
the the chief of this program organized
a party for all the staff when they had
killed their 10,000th victim
in England a hundred and ninety-seven
families of thalidomide children were
suing distillers the British company
which had distributed the drug
distillers made a ridiculously low offer
of compensation and warned that the
money would be paid out only if all
parents agree to the lifetime deal five
families refused the offer they were led
by David Mason a wealthy London art
dealer and father of Louise now I came
under tremendous pressure I received
threats on my life I had a police guard
for a period of time I had anonymous
phone calls I had anonymous letters I
had you know threats from parents
her father's well publicized opposition
to the compensation created problems for
Louise at her care institution up until
then I was like one of the crowd but
after that I was picked on and that's
when I felt like I was alone in amongst
a crowd Louise escaped the hostility of
her classmates when her father took her
out to participate in publicity events
for his campaign I was used as a as
opposed to go not only because I was his
daughter but because I had the extremes
of the disability and visually I had
great impact
David Mason's campaign succeeded in
increasing by six times the drug
company's original offer to the parents
I did pay a heavy price personally but
if I hadn't have paid that price the
thalidomide errs wouldn't have got the
compensation when they got the
compensation so I think it was worth the
litter miters were becoming teenagers
and in Winnipeg Paul Murphy was having a
difficult adolescence he went to high
school with other kids and of course he
did have problems because he was
rejected he did make a few friends but
not very many
I think everybody's right into those
kind of problems
or just being told no I don't want to go
with you because of your situation not
fun not a nice thing to have happen
nobody likes to have that kind of
rejection thrown at them but there's
some very frustrating times and whoever
says they've never felt almost
self-destructive and not what you know
Jesus would be hell of a lot easier if I
wasn't and I've been to those low points
luckily enough I was able to pull myself
back out Alvin Law thrived in school and
by the time he was a teenager he seemed
to fit right in as far as the whole
scene of school has been I think that's
the most important part is being
accepted by people if you're not
accepted on they won't be worth anything
it was about acceptance totally and it
was about asking two or three girls out
on dates - which I heard are you kidding
I wanted to date just like any sixteen
year old but I didn't have that good
fortune and of course I used to blame it
on the girls and maybe it was partly
them but I know it was mostly me I
thought that I was gonna have to be a
nun I didn't think that I was gonna go
on dates I didn't know what was gonna
happen and that that's not how it
happened
I had a great high school run I mean you
know I had a lot of fun I had a lot of
friends I am too much fun if you're like
me and my friends you drive around and
you look for holes and you go
skinny-dipping and that's what we did
for entertainment I never had a problem
with girls I could always get very nice
girls beautiful girls intelligent girls
but I couldn't get the stupid blonde one
and I wanted that stupid blonde one for
one-night stand but that I never
achieved she was wearing glasses and I
didn't notice I found my now wife when
she was 16 and maybe you called it a
lack of opportunity but I'm still with
her she was blond and not stupid
for most bulletin miters getting behind
the wheel of a car was the road to
independence and freedom Louise Mason
was determined to drive no matter how
difficult it was for her just physically
to get behind the wheel and do up her
seatbelt
[Applause]
my driving instructor never instructed a
salient person that loan somebody who'd
got no arms and legs but the texture was
excitedly the same as everyone else
there's no difference they came so
naturally I've been driving electric
wheelchairs for most of my life and in a
car was just my parents they were the
most practical people I think I've ever
met in my entire life so when it came to
learning how to drive that was just
practical that way you can get around on
your own you don't depend on people to
take care of you you don't have to worry
about taking a bus or using a cab and it
was really just about trying to figure
it out anyway I just love driving my
favorite things in the world to do
most people don't consider the power of
my mind and I my mind is a very powerful
tool and it interjects all kinds of
things into my systems so that my feet
are literally my hands so when it comes
to driving I take it really seriously
and I have hi explain why can't I can
drive with one foot on the wheel what is
people's excuse they've got both hands
and their feet and yet they drive like
shit this doesn't make any sense to me
in Germany Nika von glosso knew from an
early age he had to choose a future
occupation that would not require the
use of his deformed arms as ultimate
food for the sexes ultimate under phone
number is about him it's a mountain
fortress tomorrow I realized quite soon
I'm never will be a conductor or a
painter or a dancer I can't sing so I
became a director because I'm you know I
can't do anything else to pursue his
dream Nika went to prestigious film
schools and apprenticed under the
legendary German director Rainer Werner
Fassbinder before making a number of
successful feature films but there was
one prize job he wanted better directing
a big movie on thalidomide and the head
of German TV he said no you can't have
the job but you can make a documentary
on thalidomide and I said you know I you
know I that was in come and I shouted at
him I used the f-word very loudly and
very often because I said I apply for
the job you know you pay well another F
documentary filmmaker who gets not paid
yeah and that's so typical you know you
give the disabled guy the side job yeah
and then I went home and my wife said
what's the matter and I told her they
want me to do a film about the termite
and what do I know about the letter
might yeah and she looked at me and said
Nico it's time to look the devil in this
asshole
monie Eisenberg was being raised by a
poor single mother after her father died
in a mountaineering accident when she
was nine by the time she was a teenager
Moni had become an activist against
grinning South as a company contact in a
way they have in the case of contig on
there are really no boundaries between
right and wrong over the next 40 years
Moni participated in protests and hunger
strikes against the drug company but
there was also tragedy that occurred
regularly over the years that brought
Moni to the gates of the grinning
Southland this is a place where they
spread out all this poison in the world
and affected so many people and so many
families and it's some like me always
the chibber in the inside because it's
touching me too much
so I brought letters and candles here to
green and tile anytime when I heard that
somebody of us survived was Wendy died
we need to remember all these people all
these victims of ruining town and just
to remember that we are still here what
the little miners didn't know was that
the drug was still in circulation though
grinning Thal had stopped producing the
drug thalidomide made an early comeback
in the mid 60's when other suppliers
began manufacturing it in India and some
South American countries where it had
become the drug of choice for treating
leprosy by 1972 and 1973 when out 12
years after the withdrawal of the drug
it's reported in use at 62 leprosy
centers around the world and was clearly
being used on a massive scale one of the
main countries using it for this
application in Brazil and by 2003 there
were there were probably in the order of
a thousand thalidomide babies had been
born in Brazil across that period and
the ability to control this euphoric
addictive drug that is widely available
in Latin America is impossible Alvin law
found himself in the public limelight
when he became his provinces spokesman
for a handicapped children
think
at least I
and if you let me
over the years Alvin would make
appearances on telephones across the
country
I think I can
[Music]
not better than other handicapped people
because I'm not a handicapped person
that's what people get it wrong right
they look at Alvin law and they think
god it's tremendous how he can do things
with his feet well I suppose if you look
at your feet it's tremendous but these
are my feet these are my hands too and I
have been doing it forever these are not
tremendous feet these are the only thing
that I've got so when I pick up a cup
and I have a drink you know
wow what a thrill that's not what it is
I do think
[Music]
[Applause]
life wasn't so kind for another
thalidomide poster child Louise Mason
continued to injure bullying from other
kids at her institution for the
handicapped but one day when she was 13
she was raped by another student Louise
went to a nurse for help I was shaking I
was tearful and they took my underwear
off and saw blood and I tried to explain
to them what had happened they did
nothing they did nothing wrong
Louise endured five more years of fear
and loneliness before finally leaving
the institution then like any 18 year
old Louise immediately started to enjoy
the freedom and joys of college life are
its parts is just the sheer hell of
going to classes I'd be absolutely clean
crappy but I'd still go because it was
something I shouldn't have done or
wasn't allowed to do I went to the path
regularly drug not severe regularly I
got into trouble then you won't suppress
our boys in your room my deed and but I
made it say I've got to vice president
of the Student Union and got well
respected unlike Louise Mason who rarely
saw her mother during childhood
yeah I'm shelter Hill informed a close
bond with his mother from birth and her
unwavering support and encouragement
were critical in his career decision she
never lost hope she said you you
everything you want to achieve in your
life you're going to achieve it I
haven't absolutely no doubt and when I
when I turned up with it with the idea
that that I wanted to be a doctor
everybody told me you should not it's
not a very good idea you cannot do that
you will have severe problems she said
son do your own thing if that's what you
want to do you're gonna manage
yawn is now an emergency room doctor in
Switzerland I don't consider my
condition as a major issue I mean I'm
not a fella to mine and first spot on
first but I'm a man I'm trying to be a
good doctor I'm trying to be a good
husband and a father and a lover and I
have short arms and that's it and and if
people have problems accepting me or I
have problems to interact with me
because I have short arms it's that
program it's not mine in Canada most of
the countries falooda miters hadn't
received a penny of compensation for
their injuries for 25 years the Canadian
government had failed to live up to its
promises to look after the victims of
this drug so the war amputees of Canada
brought them to Ottawa in 1987 unlike
their German and English counterparts
the Canadian victims had spent 25 years
separate and apart from each other it's
kind of interesting finally after 25
years to sit down with a group of people
you're kind of related to and start to
find out exactly what everybody else is
doing
the thalidomide victims Association of
Canada was formed with Paul Murphy being
elected vice president and Alvin law
recording secretary after years of
waiting suffering and fighting for
compensation Canadian victims of
thalidomide are finally getting the help
they need from the federal government
yesterday the health minister said
survivors of the drug will receive
lifelong pensions individuals can now
start feeling comfortable about their
future they know they have a an amount
of money coming in every year that can
support them and help them Hey I don't
know what your lives are like sometimes
life can really be rough on people I
understand that I get it I've been in
real life
Alvin Law is a motivational speaker
who's influenced audiences in North
America and Australia with his message
of hope especially to more than 2
million youngsters who've heard his talk
speaking is the best thing that I could
have ever decided the dear you're
helping kids and they need to have
somebody come in and tell them that it's
gonna be okay but I get such tremendous
joy out of doing it there's nothing in
my life that makes me happier than
speaking to kids nothing and the next
time you're ready to give up or quit or
pack it in well if it helps even a
little bit
remember the goofy looking guy that
played the drums with his feet but
remember the words I live by every day
there's no such word as can't thanks
when we're seeing
[Applause]
how many people can say that they can go
out and speak to a group for an hour and
have them actually you can see the
change you can see the reflection you
can see the thought that's going on in
their mind as to what they've just
experienced album travels over a hundred
thousand miles a year on his own but
after 30 years on the road his body is
starting to wear out it takes its toll
you know carrying that stuff around I
mean you know my body may not last as
long as normal bodies do because of what
I'm putting it through I mean as much as
I make this look easy I'm still putting
my body through a lot of stuff just the
pain in my back from carrying my luggage
scar tissue in my shoulder from carrying
a briefcase for 35 years you know
there's not really a shoulder here so
what I'm carrying it with I shouldn't be
doing this I should have like a Sherpa
or something hey how does a guy without
arms function on the road all by himself
I carry my own luggage with straps I
check into hotels all on my own I I rent
cars write my keys there you go Thank
You boss right in my toes thank you now
why do I rent cars I it's just how I
prefer to function
I don't do cabs because strangely they
don't stop when you go
I'm still tromping around while the
airport's checking into hotels see bad
food
driving everywhere in the middle of
nowhere getting involved in blizzards
and swearing at my wife for putting me
out yet in another life and death
situation and not thinking I'm getting
paid enough see what I mean I can get on
a rant but at the end of the day she
also says this line this is a wonderful
line honey if you're tired of traveling
I'm sure there's a cubicle with your
name written on it in a windowless
office somewhere in the middle of
nowhere for a mundane job that you hate
five minutes and then I go to me
[Music]
in Germany nico von glosso had to
overcome his lifetime aversion to other
thalidomide errs when he decided to make
a documentary in which he and eleven
other victims would pose nude for a
calendar first I went to a disability
school and from that moment on I wanted
to have nothing to do with thalidomide
res anymore
and then because I made this film
nobody's perfect
I was kind of forced to meet them again
and I hated to make this film I didn't
want to look at myself
[Music]
nobody's perfect changed everything it
changed how I look at myself
it changed the movement of 3d models
completely because the first time not
lawyer is not someone else not doctors
were fighting for us really big time we
were fighting I think for me for us as
Toledo miters but also for the public
something changed the energy changed
Nico from glaze Oh Hilario film there
nobody's perfect
in 2008 Nikko received the German
equivalent of an Oscar for his
documentary on Khalid Omar based on a
familiar and familiar heist
bills I need a rise in four million
dollars Media tiara the advance
difficult 14th meet Hunterdon Parfum
keep your own stuff on it was up ba home
but I still didn't get the money in
college
Eileen Cronin fell in love with Andy a
graduate student in economics I was in
love very definitely at first sight
although I already had a boyfriend you
know I immediately was drawn to her you
know her vivaciousness and intelligence
and her wit we moved in together um and
we got pregnant very quickly
um very quickly
I was wracked with worry all my life
about having a child because I didn't
know for sure that my mother had taken
the lid imide I was kind of panicked it
started to settle in oh my god I'm gonna
have a baby I don't even know if I can
have a baby um I don't know if the
baby's gonna have legs or not have legs
or something else but also literally I
did not know how I was gonna carry a
baby in my body and so they did the
ultrasound the ultrasound technician
zoomed in right away found foot one foot
blew it up took a picture and wrote foot
and then other foot hands fingers and I
was crying and all the interns started
clapping we knew that she would be okay
[Music]
Hanyu and eileen our best friends it's
not hard to understand why anya took up
to be a ballet dancer because that's
something her mother wanted to be and
she was very young when his first wife
sandy became pregnant alvin law was
terrified about what the future held
when i saw him come out of there with
two arms and two hands and five little
fingers on each hand I didn't care what
brand he was at all care if it was a she
or he or and yet it didn't matter and it
was just the most tremendous feelings my
son
I'm gonna do it again here we go
[Music]
I worried a lot about how I was gonna
play ball with them and I was gonna
maybe how could I teach them you know it
at golf and teach them to play frisbee
and teach them to throw up you know I
mean all those things that you want to
have a kid of yours do you don't have to
have arms to be a father
you don't need arms to love him you
don't need arms to be there
you don't need arms to listen you don't
need arms to be a father at all
unfortunately too many fathers that have
arms don't realize that never forget
that and that's true you just have to be
there for him that surprised me the
tears I don't know I'm not sad I'm just
he's big now he was little him yeah well
I miss that little boy sometimes but
that's not how life works right he's a
normal regular person he's uh it's got
the same regular personality there's
nothing really wrong about it and you
just have to just have to know him and
you can't just judge him by the way he
looks what he brings and what he gives
is much more so than anything arms could
bring you know he he gives great you
know fatherly advice and he's a great
role model he's a great person and
that's all he can ask my disability is
not the most important thing whatever
happened to me my children are the most
important thing whatever happened to me
something lovely was the most important
in my life not something you know which
went wrong
I don't think I ever actually sort of
consciously realized there wasn't a
moment or a time where I consciously
said oh my dad is disabled oh and I
never really had any issue with it for
them it was the same like for Kiki or
also for me it you know when when you
are with me longer than you know a few
hours you just
there isn't much he can't do with me so
apart from maybe playing rugby there
isn't much you I can't do it in like I
couldn't couldn't do otherwise he's a
pretty good father and he's very a big
character to say the least
it's good to be rich yeah I work on it
I'm getting rich by the minute more and
more why not
it's nice you know just bought myself a
castle Nico's castle is a 15th century
home in Tuscany with a hundred and eight
rooms including 18 bedrooms a very good
with money I mean I invested the right
moment into Apple and I went out at the
right moment
Nico uses a lot of his money to finance
charities in Asia including an orphanage
in the Philippines and a film school and
Tibet so rich people have the tendency
to are stingy bastards and I don't want
to be one of them Louise Mason had been
a single mother for ten years when she
received a Christmas card from an old
boyfriend
I'd heard that Louise hadn't been very
well and sent her a Christmas card and
come down and said hello and I think the
spark reignited is the best way to
describe it he kissed me goodbye and
butterflies were I was sort of floating
on on a cloud and he told his wife that
he was leaving she helped impact car
and then he moved on here we've been
together since let him hold it up an
understanding with each other it's
really weird you know the we cannot add
something and you guys wouldn't know
what I'm talking about but I know
straight away what she's pointing out
you know the nod of the head or a
mannerism you pick up yo but the little
more did you just pick up on each other
it's as though we've got a sixth inch
you know it's really really fascinating
know where we communicate hear each
other without even talking yeah we and I
think we I think we were made for each
other to be honest yeah you know I
remember thinking 28 years old divorced
got a kid losing my hair gaining a gun
have no arms what a package and then I
got to thinking you know I've got to
change this
that's how Alvin introduced himself to
his future wife Darlene who was sitting
in the audience one day that conference
was the first time I heard him speak in
it actually believed who not sounds
corny but it was a life-changing event
for me I was in the process of
considering making a final decision
about a rather unhappy marriage I
thought yeah he's right life is too
short I have to make decisions for
myself I mean anybody that sees her for
the first time can't miss that smile and
just absolutely melt and I melted
I have friends who tell me that I smiled
more of the day of my wedding than
they've ever seen me smile in my entire
life and it was permanently glued there
for days that was the beginning of the
joy it ended in that ring going on that
finger and it's still there today you
can't even describe it it's like all
these years of angst and frustration
just melted away in five minutes she's
passed her best before date so she's got
no choice he's got to stick with me now
there's no option ups and our downs when
we've had some highs and some a lot of
lows just like anybody else but it just
keeps getting better and I know it
sounds cliche but it's getting easier
and more fun there's a lot of credit
that I get for doing this but I didn't
just do this you know I had my parents
first
I had my teachers second and then I had
her
and those three elements of my life have
been they've really been what has
supplied the fuel for what drives
[Music]
that's squirrel waving at us
I met Paul on the internet and I got a
message from this gentleman that had a
kind of cute picture so we started
emailing back and forth and I came out
to visit and moved I fell in love
quickly um
I never noticed his disability because
it was Paul that I was interested in the
person that he is and his disability
didn't matter to me I always say he's
the least disabled person I know the
words I live by are there's always a
solution over under around or through in
1997 the thalidomide victims Association
of Canada faced an agonizing choice a
small American drug company Celgene
wanted to bring thalidomide onto the
market as a treatment for leprosy and
cancer but needed the approval of the
Federal Drug Administration in
Washington
Celgene sought the support of Canadian
victims for its application if the lid
amide can change for the better the life
of a child with cancer then let's
produce it and let's give it to these
children and let's make their lives
better and if it's because of the price
that we had to pay good then maybe we
can have some solace in knowing that it
wasn't all in vain in July 1998 the US
Food and Drug Administration licensed a
thalidomide based drunk but imposed the
tightest rules on its use for any drug
in history officially Celgene got FDA
approval for thalidomide to treat lepers
a miniscule American market but the drug
company quickly began focusing on it as
a treatment from multiple myeloma a
cancer of the blood cells and got
approval for that use in 2006 today
Celgene leads the market for drug
treatment of more
Oh myeloma in North America and many
European Union countries selling its
patented thalidomide derivative for
approximately ten thousand dollars a
month for three hundred and thirty three
dollars up till most recently in 2013 a
major survey was done by a team of
scientists reviewing they reviewed over
70 studies the conclusion was that any
benefit from Philadelphia marginal and
the risks were very high in Australia
grown and Thal and Diageo the british
company that bought distillers were
co-defendants in a multi-million dollar
class-action suit centered on the
Linette road case melbourne woman
Lynette Roe is suing the drugs
manufacturer grinning Tao the company
wanted the case heard in Germany where
it's never successfully been sued that
the Victorian Supreme Court today
dismissed that application this was an
application by the company that made the
lid imide the worst drug in the history
of medicine to have an armless legless
woman who has no money and doesn't speak
German if she wishes to have her day in
court have to move to Germany for the
next five years so we had Diageo and
grinning tails our defendants grinning
tail have this never give in never admit
a thing never concede fight the been
around attitude distillers or Diageo
took a much more compassionate sensible
with say approach which was once
convinced of a strength of the claim
they settled with Lyn grinning tail
didn't pay a cent we face each day and
every day and cope with the incredible
damage the settlement amount was a
multi-billion dollar some it was a sum
sufficient to provide Lyn with
first-class care for the rest of her
life
it really has dramatically transformed
the Rhys lives grinning thaw refused to
pay a cent of the multi-million dollar
settlement but two months later held a
press conference so it could apologize
to its victims for the first time in
years Delaware now speaking German
Chittagong does the first finish to cure
the langoustine victory infant managed
cement company that s in Harvey Vegas
week under students a light there
apologized for some bullshit that they
didn't reach out to us or some fuck yeah
they never apologized for the suffering
their cost and they didn't pay for that
you know for their wrong
there was no apology apology comes from
the heart
yeah their apology came from their
lawyers you busy unique on the language
of our closest right as a scientist to
Minnesota long Susan the year six I'll
buy ones perfect at our family couldn't
have gone into solemn shock we had to
get up and face each day and every day
and cope with the incredible damage the
grown talk to Lena Nell family granite
tile is still a privately owned company
the works family owns it today just as
it did in 1960 it does not have show
shareholders demanding returns the Virts
family's personal fortune has been
variously estimated at between two and
three billion euros it would not drive
that family into penury or bankruptcy or
poverty to loosen the purse strings and
behave in a more generous fashion
towards survivors
I not only want the money I want the
revenge I want the revenge you know they
they killed five thousand children yeah
they made another 5,000 children life
miserable they make the life of 10,000
parents awful yeah they are responsible
and they should pay for it good and all
no longer makes the Lynn amide and
continues to deny most the little miters
outside Germany any compensation no
survivors feel they have received
double apology grinnin thaw refused to
be interviewed for this film today
Celgene continues to prosper from the
sale of its falooda my derived drugs to
treat multiple myeloma prior to getting
approval to bring its version of the
drug back onto the market in 1998 the
American drug company was valued at a
hundred million dollars today cell genes
value has soared to a hundred billion
dollars the original further to my drug
is easy and cheap to manufacture and
continues to be made and distributed by
several drug companies and governments
to treat leprosy unfortunately it is
mostly used in countries that often do
not enforce rigorous controls and
regulations as a result
falooda might injured babies are still
being born
the limiters worldwide buoyed by the
success of the Minette road case have
renewed efforts to fight for
compensation as they battle with the
continuing side-effects of mine
[Music]